dApp Staking V3 User Guides (#576)
AstarNetwork/astar-docs: docs/use/dapp-staking/for-stakers/index.md

import Figure from "/src/components/figure"

# For Stakers

## Overview

Do you love to stake? Or do you want to support your favorite project on Astar Network? 

Discover [Astar dApp Staking](/docs/learn/build2earn.md), a unique mechanism that allows communities to support their favorite teams by staking ASTR or SDN with them. When staking ASTR on a dApp, users not only support the development of innovative apps but also receive staking rewards from inflation.

You can educate yourself more by reading the technical documentation about [dApp Staking V3](/docs/learn/dapp-staking-v3/).

:::warning

dApp Staking V3 is launched and accessible only on the Shibuya testnet. For dApp Staking users on Astar and Shiden Network, please refer to the [dApp Staking V2 section](/docs/use/dapp-staking/dapp-staking-v2/).

:::

### Periods & Eras:

`Eras`: Time units measured in blocks. Fairly short, a basic time division in dApp staking;

> **dApp Staking** is divided in **Cycles** which contains two **Periods**: **Voting** and **Build&Earn**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**dApp Staking** is divided into **Periods** which consists of two **Subperiods**: **Voting** and **Build&Earn**.
```

> **Voting Period** is the period when stakers can decide to vote for dApp(s) to stake their tokens and when dApps owners and team can market their products, conduct campaign and attract stakers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Voting** is the subperiod when stakers can decide to vote for dApp(s) to stake their tokens and when dApps owners and team can market their products, conduct campaign and attract stakers.
```

No staking rewards are generated during the Voting Period but if users vote and stake on dApps during this period, they will become eligible for the **Bonus Reward**;

> **Build&Earn Period** is the period when stakers and dApps start earning rewards;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Build&Earn** is the subperiod when stakers and dApps start earning rewards;
```

> Users can still stake tokens during the Build&Earn Period but won’t be eligible for the  Bonus Reward;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can still stake tokens during the Build&Earn subperiod to increase the rewards they get from staking. However, the amount staked during Build&Earn does not contribute to the Bonus Reward. 
```

> At the end of a **Build&Earn Period**, the current period ends. A new period begins, dApp Staking  is reset and all tokens are `unstaked` from dApp(s) but remain `locked`. A new **Voting Period** starts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end of a **Build&Earn** subperiod, the current period ends. A new period begins, and all tokens are `unstaked` from dApp(s) but remain `locked`. A new **Voting Subperiod** starts.
```

As an user, you need to take the following parameters into consideration before using dApp Staking:

### Parameters:

|  | Shibuya | Shiden | Astar |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | Eras Per Cycle | 28 (~7days) | TBD | TBD |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Eras Per Period | 28 (~7days) | TBD | TBD |
```

> | Eras Per Voting Period | 8 (~48hours) | TBD | TBD |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Eras Per Voting Subperiod | 8 (~48hours) | TBD | TBD |
```

> | Eras Per Build&Earn Period | 20 (~120hours) | TBD |TBD  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Eras Per Build&Earn Subperiod | 20 (~120hours) | TBD |TBD  |
```

| Blocks Per Era | 1800 (~6hours) | TBD | TBD |

### Basic Staking Rewards:

dApp Staking rewards are generated only if tokens have been staked on a dApp for at least 1 full `Era` and distributed on the following `Era` (Era+1);

:::tip

For stakers, if you stake today, you will start earning tomorrow (next era), and the rewards will be distributed the day after tomorrow.

For dApps If you get into a tier today, you will start earning rewards tomorrow (next era) and the rewards will be distributed the day after tomorrow.

:::

For stakers, the APR is the same for all stakers, regardless of which dApp they stake on;
For dApps, staking rewards depends on the Tier system, dApps go into rewards tier based on the amount of tokens staked by users.

> Rewards must be claimed before voting for a new dApp or during the new **Voting Period**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rewards must be claimed before trying to `stake` or `unstake`.
```

*(If using the Astar Portal, the interface will automatically claim the rewards when voting)*

If a project is **unregistered** from dApp Staking, staked tokens on that project will still receive **basic rewards** as long as the tokens remain staked.

:::warning

 There is no rewards during the Unbonding period when unstaking from dApp Staking;

 :::

### Bonus Staking Rewards:

> If an user stake on dApp(s) during the **Voting Period** and keep the same staked amount or higher on a dApp through the whole **Build Period**, he is eligible for a the **Bonus Reward** for this dApp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an user stake on dApp(s) during the **Voting Subperiod** and keep the same staked amount or higher on a dApp through the whole **Build&Earn Subperiod**, they will be eligible for the **Bonus Reward** for this dApp.
```

:::info

**Example**

- User stake 1500 ASTR on **dApp A** and 1000 ASTR on **dApp B** during the `Voting` Period.

> - During the `Build&Earn` Period, user move 500 ASTR from **dApp B** to **dApp A**;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- During the `Build&Earn` subperiod, user move 500 ASTR from **dApp B** to **dApp A**;
```

> - He now has 2000 ASTR on **dApp A** and 5000 ASTR on **dApp B**, so he's still eligible for the `Bonus reward` for dApp A but no longer for **dApp B** because the tokens staked on **dApp** B are less than those staked at the end of the `Voting period` (500 < 1000 ASTR).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- He now has 2000 ASTR on **dApp A** and 500 ASTR on **dApp B**, so he's still eligible for the `Bonus reward` for dApp A but no longer for **dApp B** because the tokens staked on **dApp** B are less than those staked at the end of the `Voting period` (500 < 1000 ASTR).
```

- To be eligible for the `Bonus reward` for **dApp B**, the user must stake an additional 500 ASTR on **dApp B** to reach 1000 ASTR.

:::

> Bonus rewards can be claimed during the following `Voting Period`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bonus rewards for a period can only be claimed after the period finishes.
```

### Other:

- The **minimum** amount to stake for users is **50 SDN or 500 ASTR.**

> - You need to keep a minimum of x tokens as transferable after staking.

Reviewer: x?

- **You need to claim to receive your rewards, we recommend claiming your staking rewards once a week.**
- There is a unbonding period of around 5 days on Shiden and 10 days on Astar. Please note that this is based on a perfect block production of 12s. In case of any delay, your unbonding period can be a little longer.

> - The staking rewards are shown in APY by default. APY option is available for stakers who are compounding their rewards by re-staking after claiming. On the other hand, APR option is available for stakers who don’t do compounding. The difference is that APR represents the annual rate simply for earning your stake but APY takes compounding into account.

Reviewer: Please check this with the portal team, I'm not sure they will support re-stake on launch.

Author: This was not a reference to the auto-compouding feature but an explanation of the difference between APR and APY. I added "manually" to the sentence to make it more understandable that the user has to re-stake his rewards himself to get the APY.

import Figure from "/src/components/figure"

# For Stakers

## Overview

Do you love to stake? Or do you want to support your favorite project on Astar Network? 

> Discover [Astar dApp Staking](/docs/learn/build2earn.md), a unique mechanism that allows communities to support their favorite teams by staking ASTR or SDN with them. When staking ASTR on a dApp, users not only support the development of innovative apps but also receive staking rewards from inflation.

Reviewer 2: This link will not exist after PR https://github.com/AstarNetwork/astar-docs/pull/573 gets merged so please review that PR first, so it gets merged and then use the cross-link to /docs/learn/dapp-staking here

> You can educate yourself more by reading the technical documentation about [dApp Staking V3](/docs/learn/dapp-staking-v3/).

Reviewer 2: This is now correct link, but in PR https://github.com/AstarNetwork/astar-docs/pull/573 it will be changed to /docs/learn/dapp-staking (without version)

- To be eligible for the `Bonus reward` for **dApp B**, the user must stake an additional 500 ASTR on **dApp B** to reach 1000 ASTR.

:::

Bonus rewards for a period can only be claimed after the period finishes.

### Other:

- You need to keep a minimum of 10 ASTR or 5 SDN tokens as transferable after staking.
- **You need to claim to receive your rewards, we recommend claiming your staking rewards once a week.**
- When unlocking tokens, there is a unbonding period on Shiden and on Astar. The unbonding period lenghts can be consulted [here](/docs/use/dapp-staking/for-stakers/#parameters). Please note that this is based on a perfect block production of 12s. In case of any delay, your unbonding period can be a little longer.
- The staking rewards are shown in APY by default. APY option is available for stakers who are compounding their rewards by manually re-staking after claiming. On the other hand, APR option is available for stakers who don’t do compounding. The difference is that APR represents the annual rate simply for earning your stake but APY takes compounding into account.

> <Figure src={require('/docs/use/dapp-staking/for-stakers/img/13_header.png').default } width="100%" /> 

Reviewer 2: remove this picture. (because of Build2Eearn)

> In case you have any questions, come and join our [Discord channel](https://discord.com/invite/astarnetwork).

Reviewer 2: ...please check our FAQ section in the Learn part or join our Discord channel...
